ORDER SHEET 
IN  THE  ISLAMABAD HIGH  COURT, ISLAMABAD. 
JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT. 

C.R.No.413 of 2016 
Noman Ahmed and others  

VS         

Mst. Sobia Farooq and others  

S. No. of order / 
proceedings 

Date of  order/ 
Proceedings 
21.11.2016   Syed  Zafar  Abbas  Sherazi,  Advocate 

Order with signature of Judge and that of parties or counsel where 
necessary.  

for  the 

petitioners. 

Through  the  instant  civil  revision  petition,  the 

petitioners,  who  are 

the 

legal  heirs  of 

(late) 

Muhammad  Aftab  Umer,  impugn  the  order  dated 

27.10.2016,  passed  by  the  Court  of  the  learned  Civil 

Judge, 

Islamabad,  whereby 

the 

petitioners' 

application  seeking  review  of  the  order  dated 

19.10.2016, was dismissed.  

2. 

This  case  pertains  to  a  dispute  over  property 

between  the  legal  heirs  of  (late)  Muhammad  Aftab 

Umer. His daughter (respondent No.1) is in a dispute 

with  her  siblings  (respondents  No.1  to  5)  and  her 

mother  (respondent  No.6)  over  properties  left  by 

(late)  Muhammad  Aftab  Umer.  One  such  property  is 

House No.807, Street No.64, Sector G-9/4, Islamabad, 

the  lower  portion  whereof  (“the  suit  property”)  was 

occupied  by  respondent  No.1,  when  she  instituted  a 

civil  suit  for  partition  etc.,  against  her  siblings  and 

mother  before  the  Court  of  learned  Civil  Judge, 

Islamabad.  She  was  also  able  to  obtain  an  interim 

injunction  restraining  the  petitioners  Nos.1  to  6  from 

dispossessing  her  from  the  suit  property.  After  the 

grant  of  the 

injunctive  relief,  respondent  No.1 

complained that she had been dispossessed from the 

suit  property.  This  caused  her  to  file  a  petition  for 

contempt  of  court.  The  learned  Civil  Court,  after 

ascertaining 

that  respondent  No.1  was  not 

in 

possession  of  the  suit  property,  directed  the  bailiff 

                
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

C.R.No.413 of 2016 

(vide order dated 19.10.2016) to put respondent No.1 

back  in  possession  of  the  suit  property  from  which 

she  had  been  dispossessed.  The  petitioners 

challenged  the  said  order in  a  review  petition,  which 

was  dismissed  by  the  learned  Civil  Court,  vide  order 

dated  27.10.2016.  The  said  order  dated  27.10.2016 

has  been 

impugned 

in  the 

instant  civil  revision 

petition.   

3. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  submitted 

that  the  injunctive  relief  granted  by  the  learned  Civil 

Court  could  operate  only  for  a  period  of  six  months; 

that since the injunctive relief in favour of respondent 

No.1  had  lapsed,  there  was  no  hurdle  before  the 

petitioners  in  dispossessing  respondent  No.1  from 

the suit property; that the suit for partition etc., is still 

pending,  and  respondent  No.1's  share  in  the  suit 

property  is  less  than  the portion  which  she has  been 

directed  to  be  put  in  possession  of;  that  the  suit 

property has already been rented out to a tenant; that 

until the tenancy expires, respondent No.1 cannot be 

put 

in  possession  of 

the  suit  property; 

that 

respondent No.1 was refusing to receive her share of 

the  rental  from  the  ground  portion  of  the  suit 

property;  and  that  respondent  No.1  had  left  the  suit 

property on her own volition. Learned counsel for the 

petitioners  prayed  for  the  orders  dated  19.10.2016 

and 27.10.2016 to be set aside.  

4. 

I  have  heard  the  contentions  of  the  learned 

counsel  for  the  petitioners  and  have  perused  the 

record.  

5. 

The  record  shows  that  respondent  No.1,  (Sobia 

Farooq),  is  late  Muhammad  Aftab  Umer's  daughter. 

Respondent  No.1  is  petitioner  No.1  to  5's  sister.  On 

25.07.2012,  respondent  No.1  instituted  a  suit  for 

partition,  permanent  injunction  and  recovery  of  her 

shar'ai share in the properties listed  in paragraphs 3 

to  6  of  the  suit.  One  of  these  properties  is  House 

3 

C.R.No.413 of 2016 

No.807,  Street  No.64,  Sector  G-9/4, 

Islamabad. 

Respondent No.1 and petitioner No.1 to 5’s late father 

previously  owned  this  property.  Respondent  No.1 

was  in  occupation  of  the  lower  portion  of  the  said 

property when she instituted the suit. Petitioners No.1 

to  6  contested  the  suit  by  filing  a  written  statement. 

Along  with  the  said  suit,  respondent  No.1  filed  an 

application  for 

interim  relief  seeking  a  restraint 

against 

the  petitioners 

from 

interfering  with 

respondent  No.1's  peaceful  possession  of  the  suit 

property.  Vide  ad-interim  order  dated  25.07.2012, 

injunctive relief was granted to respondent No.1, and 

the  petitioners  were  restrained  from  dispossessing 

respondent  No.1  from  the  lower  portion  of  the  suit 

property.  Vide  order  dated  27.02.2013,  the  learned 

Civil  Court  confirmed  the  interim  relief  in  favour  of 

respondent  No.1.  On  26.03.2013,  respondent  No.1 

filed  a  petition  before  the  learned  Civil  Court  against 

petitioners No.1, 2, 4 and 5 for initiating proceedings 

for Contempt of Court. In this petition, it was inter alia 

pleaded 

that  on  02.03.2013  and  03.03.2013, 

petitioners  No.1,  2,  4  and  5  had  forced  respondent 

No.1  and  her  family  to  leave  the  suit  property  in 

violation  of 

the  orders  dated  25.07.2012  and 

27.02.2013, and that the incident was reported to the 

police.  The  learned  Civil  Court,  vide  order  dated 

19.02.2014,  directed  the  bailiff  to  submit  a  report 

regarding the possession of the suit property. Report 

dated  24.11.2014,  showed  that  respondent  No.1 was 

not  in  possession  of  the  suit  property.  Vide  order 

dated 26.07.2016, the learned Civil Court directed the 

bailiff to immediately take over possession of the suit 

property from the petitioners and hand the same over 

to  respondent  No.1.  It  seems  that  the  said  orders 

were not complied with.  

6.  Vide  order  dated  19.10.2016,  the  learned  Civil 

Court  again  directed  the  bailiff  to  place  respondent 

4 

C.R.No.413 of 2016 

No.1 in possession of the suit property in accordance 

with  the  law.  Thereafter,  the  petitioners  filed  an 

application 

for  a  review  of 

the  order  dated 

19.10.2016.  The  defence  put 

forward  by 

the 

petitioners was that respondent No.1 had, on her own 

accord, left the suit property, which had been rented 

out  until  31.12.2016,  and  that  the  order  dated 

19.10.2016 could not be implemented until the expiry 

of  the  lease  period.  Furthermore,  it  was  averred  by 

the  petitioners  that  the  order  dated  19.10.2016  was 

passed  without  hearing  the  petitioners.  Vide  order 

dated  27.10.2016,  the  learned  Civil  Court  dismissed 

the  petitioners'  application  seeking  review  of  the 

order  dated  19.10.2016.  The  learned  Civil  Court 

observed  that  earlier,  vide  orders  dated  30.05.2015 

and  26.07.2016,  the  bailiff  had  been  directed  to  put 

respondent No.1 in possession of the  ground floor of 

the suit property, but to no avail. Furthermore, it was 

held that as respondent No.1 had been dispossessed 

during  the  currency  of  injunctive  relief  in  favour  of 

respondent    No.1,  she  was  entitled  to  be  put  in 

possession  of  the  portion  of  the  suit  property  from 

which  she  was  dispossessed.  The  petitioners  in  the 

instant  petition  have  impugned  the  said  order  dated 

27.10.2016.  

7. 

It  has  not  been  denied  that  the  ad-interim 

injunctive order dated 25.07.2012, was in respondent 

No.1's  favour.  It  is  also  an  admitted  position  that  the 

said  injunctive  relief  was  confirmed  on  27.02.2013, 

after  an  inter-parte  hearing.  During  the  currency  of 

the  injunctive  orders  passed  by  the  learned  Civil 

Court,  respondent  No.1  was  dispossessed  from  the 

suit property.  This  fact  was  confirmed  by  the bailiff's 

report, as mentioned above. In such state of affairs, I 

am  of  the  view  that  the  learned  Civil  Court  did  not 

commit  any  jurisdictional  error  by  directing  that 

respondent  No.1  be  handed  over  possession  of  the 

5 

C.R.No.413 of 2016 

portion of the suit property from which she had been 

dispossessed. It is also a matter of record that such a 

direction  was  given  by  the  learned  Civil  Court  on 

three  occasions.  These  directions  are  yet  to  be 

complied  with.  The  injunctive  orders  passed  by  the 

learned  Civil  Court  in  favour  of  respondent  No.1, 

have, till date, not been set aside.  

8. 

Learned  counsel  for  the  petitioners  did  not 

dispute  that  respondent  No.1  was  in  possession  of 

the suit property on the date of institution of the suit. 

He,  however,  contended  that,  respondent  No.1  was 

dispossessed  after  the  lapse  of  six  months  of  the 

issuance  of  the  injunctive  order.  Now,  the  injunctive 

order  was  confirmed  on  27.02.2013,  whereas  the 

contempt  petition  was  filed  by  respondent  No.1  on 

26.03.2013,  alleging  dispossession  at  the  hands  of 

petitioners  No.1,  2,  4  and  5  on  02.03.2013  and 

03.03.2013.  Since,  the  alleged  dispossession  was 

within  a  period  of  six  months  of  the  confirmation  of 

the  injunctive  order,  the  petitioners  cannot  escape 

liability by contending the injunctive order had lapsed 

in  terms  of  Order  XXXIX,  Rule  2(B)  C.P.C.  As  it  was 

confirmed  by  the  bailiff  in  his  report  that  respondent 

No.1 was not in possession of the suit property, it was 

the  duty  of  the  learned  Civil  Court  to  restore  the 

status quo ante  by  putting  respondent  No.1  back  in 

possession  of  the  suit  property.  Indisputably  the  act 

of  dispossession  amounts  to  over-reaching  the 

process  of  law  and  it  is  the  duty  of  the  learned  Civil 

Court  to  protect  the  rights  of  the  parties  as  they 

existed on the date of filing of the suit and the grant of 

an  injunction.  In  taking  this  view,  I  have  taken  into 

account  the  law  laid  down  by  the  Superior  Court  in 

the following cases:- 

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Bakhtawar  VS  Amin  (1980  SCMR 

89), it has been held as follows:  

“6.  …  It  is  well  settled  that  when  by 
contravening an injunction order the party 

 
6 

C.R.No.413 of 2016 

against whom the order is passed has done 
something  for  its  own  advantage  to 
disadvantage of the other party, it is open to 
the Court under its inherent jurisdiction to 
bring back the party to a position where it 
originally stood, as if the order had not been 
contravened. The exercise of this inherent 
power is based on the principle that no party 
can be allowed to take advantage of his own 
wrong in spite of the order to the contrary 
passed  by  the  court.  See  Ayyammal  and 
another v. Thangavelu Padayachi (AIR 1950 
Mad. 317); Maharaj Bahadur Singh v. A. H. 
Forbes (AIR 1922 Pat. 382), Tile State of Bihar 
v. Usha Devi and another (AIR 1956 Pat. 455) 
and  Magna  and  another  v.  Rustam  and 
another (AIR 1963 Raj. 3). In B. F. Yarghese v. 
Joseph  Thomas  (AIR  1957  Trav.-Co.  286) 
where  the  Court  had  already  passed  a 
temporary injunction against the defendants 
but the subsequent action of the plaintiffs in 
interfering with the subject-matter tended to 
discredit the temporary injunction, it was held 
that the Court was justified in granting a 
temporary injunction at the instance of the 
defendants ordering the plaintiffs to restore 
the status quo.” 

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Saleem-ud-Din  VS  Municipal 

Committee (2000 SCMR 460), the appellants had 

violated a status quo order that had been issued 

by the Hon'ble High Court of Sindh. For violating 

the  status  quo  order,  the  Hon'ble  High  Court 

ordered  that  the  appellants  be  detained 

in 

prison  for  a  term  of  six  months,  or  until  they 

demolish  the  construction  raised  during  this 

subsistence of the status quo  order.  In  order to 

give an opportunity to the appellants to establish 

their  bonafides,  the  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court 

accepted  the  appellants’  offer  to  demolish  the 

construction raised in violation of the status quo 

order, and to pay compensation to the party who 

had 

obtained 

the  status  quo 

order. 

Consequently, 

the  appellants'  apology  was 

accepted  and  the  order  of  the  Hon'ble  High 

Court  to  detain  the  appellants  in  a  civil  prison 

was  held  in  abeyance  till  such  time  that  the 

 
7 

C.R.No.413 of 2016 

appellants  demolished  the  construction  raised 

during the subsistence of the status quo order.  

(iii) 

In  the  case  of  Muhammad  Anwar  VS  Municipal 

Corporation, Faisalabad (1993 CLC 1851), it was 

inter-alia held by the Hon'ble High Court of Sindh 

that  if  a  civil  court  finds  that  the  petitioner  was 

dispossessed/ejected  during  the  subsistence  of 

a  status quo  order,  it  will  certainly  direct  the 

restoration of possession to him.  

(iv) 

In  the  case  of  Hameeda  Akhtar  VS  Nazir 

Muhammad (1995 CLC 2020), it was held by the 

Hon'ble  Peshawar  High  Court  that  if  a  party, 

against  whom  temporary  injunction  is  issued, 

disobeys  it,  after  gaining  knowledge  of  the 

same,  such  a  party  can  be  committed  to  a  civil 

prison  and  his  property  can  be  attached  and 

sold  under  Clause  (c)  of  Section  94  read  with 

Order  XXXIX  Rule  2(3)  C.P.C.  Furthermore,  it 

was  held  that  even  if  the  status quo/injunctive 

order  is  discharged  later,  but  if  a  party  violates 

it during the period when it remained operative, 

the  violator  can  be  proceeded  against.  The 

Hon'ble  High  Court  ordered  that  the  entire 

construction raised in violation of the status quo 

order had to be removed and possession was to 

be  restored  as  it  existed  on  the  day  when  the 

status quo order was issued.  

(v) 

In  the  case  of  Akbar  Ali  VS  Muhammad  Sabir 

(1989  MLD  92),  it  was  inter-alia  held  by  the 

Hon'ble  Lahore  High  Court  that  if  an  act  was 

done  by  a  party  in  violation  of  a  temporary 

injunction, the Court could direct the restoration 

of  status  quo  ante.  The  Hon'ble  High  Court 

directed  the  petitioners  to  forthwith  deliver 

possession  to  the  respondent,  and  to  remove 

the  construction  raised  during  the  subsistence 

of 

the 

injunctive  order.  Furthermore, 

the 

8 

C.R.No.413 of 2016 

petitioners  were  directed  to  be  detained  in  a 

civil prison for a period of one week.  

(vi) 

In  the  case  of  Hazara  (Hill  Tract)  Improvement 

Trust VS Qaisera Ellahi (2005 SCMR 678), it was 

held  that  no  vested  right  accrues  in  favour  of  a 

party  to  claim  protection  of  law,  who  violates  a 

status quo  order  by  raising  construction  during 

the subsistence of the same.  

(vii)  In  the  case  of  Mayo  Khan  VS  Bashir  Ahmad 

(2007  MLD  588),  it  was  held  that  a  party  which 

had  raised  construction  in  violation  of  a  status 

quo  order,  had  disentitled 

itself 

from 

discretionary relief from a Court.   

9.  Reference  may  also  be  made  to  case-law  from 

the Indian jurisdiction:-  

(i) 

In  the  case  of  Sujit  Pal  VS  Prabir  Kumar  Sum 

(AIR  1986  Cal.  220),  it  was  held  that  when  the 

plaintiff  in  a  suit  for  permanent  injunction  and 

declaration 

of 

tenancy 

was 

forcibly 

dispossessed 

in  violation  of  an 

interim 

injunction,  the  civil  Court  could 

invoke 

its 

inherent  power  to  grant  temporary  mandatory 

injunction  by  directing  the  police  to  restore 

possession.  

(ii) 

In  the  case  of  Kailash  Chand  Gupta  VS  Rukam 

Singh Yadev (AIR 1998 MP 310), it has been held 

that  when  the  defendant  violates  an  order  of 

interim  injunction  granted  by  the  trial  Court 

securing  the  possession  of  the  plaintiff  and 

forcibly dispossesses the plaintiff, the Court can 

pass  an  order  of  mandatory  injunction  under 

Section  151  of  C.P.C. 

for  restoration  of 

possession to the plaintiff. 

(iii) 

In the case of Satish Chandra VS Saila Bala (AIR 

1978  Cal.  499),  it  was  observed  that  when  a 

party  comes 

into  possession  of  property 

violating  an  order  of  injunction,  it  is  the  duty  of 

9 

C.R.No.413 of 2016 

the Court to  restore possession,  by  recourse to 

its  inherent  powers  under  Section  151  C.P.C. 

The High Court of Rajasthan also, in the case of 

Magna  VS  Rustam  (AIR  1963  Raj.  3)  held  that 

Section 151 C.P.C.  can  be invoked  when  one of 

the  parties  obtained  possession,  violating  an 

order  of 

injunction.  The  same  view 

finds 

acceptance 

in 

the  cases  of  Hari  Nandan 

Agrawal  VS  S.N.  Pandita  (AIR  1975  All.  48), 

State of Bihar VS Usha Devi (AIR 1956 Pat. 455), 

and Kochira Krishanan VS Joseph Desouza (AIR 

1986 Ker 63). 

10.  Consensus 

of 

judicial 

opinion,  without 

divergence,  is  that  Section  151  C.P.C.  should  also  be 

invoked to effectuate an order validly made by a Court 

of  competent  jurisdiction.  When  unlawful  means  are 

adopted by a party, it is plainly the responsibility of the 

Court to invoke Section 151 C.P.C. to secure the ends 

of  justice,  or  to  prevent  abuse  of  process  of  Court. 

That is what the learned Civil Court did by passing the 

Order  dated  19.10.2016,  and  that  is  what  it  was 

required  to  do.  Hence,  the  Orders  dated  19.10.2016 

and 27.10.2016 do not call for interference. 

11.  To  allow  the  petitioners  to  retain  possession  of 

the  suit  property  on  the  ground  that  during  the 

subsistence  of  the  injunctive  order,  they  had  rented 

out the suit property to someone else would amount to 

putting  a  premium  on 

lawlessness.  When 

the 

appellants 

violated 

the 

injunctive 

order 

by 

dispossessing  respondent  No.  1  they  ought  to  have 

been  aware  of  the  consequences  which  would  follow. 

The  petitioners  cannot  take  shelter  behind  their  own 

wrong  which  has  been  further  accentuated  by  the 

creation  of  a  tenancy.  The 

jurisdiction  to  make 

restitution  is  inherent  in  every  Court  and  will  be 

exercised whenever the justice of the case demands. 

10 

C.R.No.413 of 2016 

12. 

In 

this  view  of 

the  aforementioned, 

the 

petitioners 

deserve 

no 

indulgence 

in 

the 

discretionary/revisional 

jurisdiction  of 

this  Court. 

Resultantly,  this  petition  is dismissed in limine.  Office 

is  directed  to  transmit  a  copy  of  this  order  to  the 

learned Civil Court.  

(MIANGUL HASSAN AURANGZEB) 

           JUDGE  

APPROVED FOR REPORTING  

Qamar Khan* 

Uploaded By: Zulqarnain Shah 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
